# Web with Python questions

## Software design

### Clean code

#### Point out 5 suggestions, how to format an SQL query!
* Separate your query into multiple lines.
* Capitalize keywords such as "WHERE, HAVING, SELECT" for better readability.
* Use "AS" to rename columns when needed for a prettier display.
* Use underscore when naming tables/columns with multiple words in them.
* Avoid giving the same name for both the table and a column.
#### What layers can you name in a simple web application?
* Front-end (What happens on the user's computer.)
* Back-end (What happens on the server's side.)
* Data storage and access (Usually SQL Datbase, or CSV file.)
or
* Preservation
* Data Service
* Business
* Data Access
### Error handling
#### What error can occur, when an array does not have an element on the requested index?
* If the requested index is bigger than the length of the array, then an index error occurs.
* Else, the program runs as it would normally, however, the returned value will be empty.
#### What is the “finally” block, and how would you use it?
* The finally block is part of a try-except block.
* A try-except block is used to catch special exception types in a program.
* The finally block runs once the try-except (or try-catch) block has finished it's tasks. 
#### Why should we catch special exception types?
* Exceptions are prone to break the running of our code when they occur.
* Catching exceptions allows us to do a workaround when an exception occurs so that they won't break our code.
### Security
#### What is SQL injection? How to protect an application against it?
* SQL injection is a code injection technique in which a client inserts malicious SQL statements into an entry field for execution.
* To protect your applications from SQL Injection. Check all data coming from the user and use scripts or libraries to catch keywords in the data.
* example: Hello, my name is'); DROP DATABASE users;
#### What is XSS? How to protect an application against it?
* XSS, Cross-Site-Scripting is a security breach which takes advantage of dynamically generated webpages.
* An XSS attack happens when a client injects malicious third party scripts into a dynamically generated website.
* Most common script types include: Javascript, HTML, Flash <- now obsolete.
* Via XSS, the client is able to: highjack accounts, change user settings, and/or poison cookies with malicious code.
#### How to properly store passwords?
* Password should be stored after put through a hashing (salting) or encoding algorithm for increased security.
#### What is HTTPS?
* Secure, encrypted Hyper Text Transport Protocol connection handler.
* A modern, more secure connection handler that encrypts the requests between the client and the server.
#### What is encryption and decryption?
* Encryption is the process of encoding information.
* During encryption, the information, known as plain text is transformed into an alternative form, known as cypher text.
* Encryption algorithms usually use a pseudo-random encryption key, generated by an algorithm.
* Decyphering the information without posessing the encryption key is possible, but is much-much harder.
* Decryption is the process of transforming cypher text back into it's original, plain text form.
* In ideal circumstances only authorized parties are able to decrypt the encrypted cypher texts.
#### What is hashing?
* Hashing algorithms are used to map data of any size into a fixed size hash value.
#### What is the difference between encryption and hashing? When would you use which?
* Hashing is useful to validate data by looking at changes in the hashed value.
* Encryption is useful for encoding data to maintain confidentiality.
#### What encryption methods do you know?
* Symmetric: A single private key is used to encode the information.
* Assymmetric: A public and a private key is used to encode the information. 
* -The private key is held by the user and the private key is held by the company. 
* -Both keys are needed to decypher the information.
#### What hashing methods do you know?
* SHA - Secure Hashing Algorithm (Produces 20byte hashes). Quite secure against brute-force attacks.
* MD5 - A widely used hashing algorithm, but not very secure.
#### How/where would you store sensitive data (like db password, API key, ...) of your application?
* In a separate, secure, encripted database server.
## Computer science

### Algorithms

#### What is the difference between Stack and Queue data structure?
* Stacks follow a first in, last out principle, meaning the last element inserted will be returned first.
* Elements can only be inserted at the first place of the stack. This element is then tracked as the top.
* Queues follow a first in first out principle, meaning the first element inserted is the first to get returned.
* Elements can only be added at the rear (end) of the queue.
#### What is BubbleSort? Describe the main logic of this sorting algorithm.
* Bubble sorting works by repeatedly swapping the adjesent elements of a list if they are in the wrong order.
* The sorting algorithm has to go through the list without changing any element to know that it's sorted.
#### Explain the process of finding the maximum and minimum value in a list of numbers!
* We declare two variables, a minimum and a maximum and make it equal to the first element in the list.
* Then we iterate over the list and when we find a number that is lower than our 'minimum' variable or bigger than our 'maximum' variable, then we swap the minimum's or the maximum's value accordingly.
#### Explain the process of calculating the average value in an array of numbers!
* We iterate over every object in the array, sum up their values, then divide them with the length of the array.
#### What is Big O complexity? Explain time and space complexity!
* We divide algorithms into so-called complexity classes. A complexity class is identified by the Landau symbol O ("big O").
* Computational time complexity describes the change in the runtime of an algorithm, depending on the change in the input data's size.
  (How much does an algorithm degrade when the amount of input data increases?)
* Space complexity describes how much additional memory an algorithm needs depending on the size of the input data.
  (The additional memory needed by the algorithm for loop and helper variables, temporary arrays, etc.)
#### Explain the process of calculating the average value in a list of numbers!
* We iterate over every object in the list, sum up their values, then divide them with the ammount of the numbers in the list.

### Procedural
#### How the CASE condition works in SQL?
* The CASE condition returns a value based on a set of conditions.
* The CASE condition uses WHEN to declare responses based on the result of it's condition.
#### How the switch-case condition works in JavaScript?
* The switch statement checks a variable's value.
* The case statement does something according to what the variables value is.
* Essentially, the switch-case condition can act as a translation layer for data input.
#### How to achieve a switch-case-like structure in Python?
* Via the usage of dictionaries.
* We declare a dictionary, then translate the input by referencing it on the dictionary's keys.
#### Explain variable scoping in Python!
* A variable created inside a function is only accessible in that function.
* Variable Shadowing: When a local variable has the same name as that of an outer-scope variable. (Bad)
#### What’s the difference between const and var in JavaScript?
* Var elements' values can be altered after declaring them.
* Const elements' values cannot be altered after declaring them.
#### How the list comprehension looks like in Python?
* fruits = ['apple', 'banana', 'cherry']
* newlist = [x for x in fruits if 'a' in x] <--this returns a list with only those fruits that have the letter 'a' in them.
#### How the “ternary expression” looks like in Python?
* return 'a' if (c > b) else 'f' <-- This returns 'a' if c is bigger than b, else it return 'f'.
#### How the ternary expression looks like in JavaScript?
* return c > b ? 'a' : 'f' <-- This returns 'a' if c is bigger than b, else it return 'f'.
#### How to import a function from another module in Python?
* 'from [module] import [function] as [rename]' <-- Imports a single function from a module and renames it.
* 'import [module]' <-- Imports all functions from a module.
* 'from [module] import [function1], [function2]' <-- Import multiple functions from a single module.
* 'import [module], [module]' <-- Import all functions from multiple modules
#### How to import a function from another module in JavaScript?
* import defaultExport from "module-name"; <-- imports the defaultExport from a module.
* import { export1 } from "module-name"; <--Import a single export from a module.
* import { export1 as alias1 } from "module-name"; <-- Import a single export from a module and rename it.
* import { export1 , export2 } from "module-name"; <-- Import multiple exports from a single module.

### Functional
#### What is recursion?
* A recursive  function is when a function calls itself again based on a set of conditions.
#### Write a recursive function which calculates the Fibonacci numbers!
   def fib(n):
	if n == 1 or n == 2:
    	    return 1
	return fib(n-1)+fib(n-2)

	print(fib(15))```
#### How to store a function in a variable in Python?
* x = def foo(): print('asd')
#### List the ways of defining a callable logical unit in JavaScript!
* function squareNumbers(number){return number * number}
* squareNumbers: funciton(number) {return number * number}
* squareNumbers = (number) => number**2
#### What is an event listener? How to attach one?
* Event listeners attach a Javascript function to DOM elements that are only called when a specified 'event' is happening.
* Such events include 'click', 'dragstart', 'dragover', 'dragend'.
* Example:
	let x = document.querySelector('#id')
	x.addEventListener('click', function(event){ body of the function })
#### How to trigger an event in JavaScript?
* The first argument in the event listener hints to the method of how to trigger it's function.
* 'click' <-- function triggers upon clicking at the target,
* 'dragstart' <-- function triggers upon starting to drag the object,
* 'dragover' <-- function triggers upon dragging something over the event target.
* 'dragend' <-- function triggers upon deciding to end the dragging of the event target,
* 'drop' <-- function triggers upon dropping the event target to somewhere other than where it started from originally.
#### What is a callback function? Tell some examples of its usage.
* Callbacks are when a function is used as argument in another function.
* callback functions are useful when we want to manipulate an other functions retun data.
#### What is a Python decorator? How does it work? Tell some examples of its usage.
* A decorator takes in a function, adds some functionality and returns it.
```Javascript
def smart_divide(func):
   def inner(a,b):
      print("I am going to divide",a,"and",b)
      if b == 0:
         print("Whoops! cannot divide")
         return

      return func(a,b)
   return inner

@smart_divide
def divide(a,b):
    return a/b
```
#### What is the difference between synchronous and asynchronous execution?
* Syncronous execution means that the functions elements get called in one after the other on a single thread.
* Asyncronous functions mean that part of the function can be put into a queue and checked in later without blocking the main thread.

## Programming languages

### SQL

#### How can you connect your application to a database server? What are the possible ways?
* I need a connection string and a connection object from the database provider to set a session with the database server. For Python we can use the psycopg2 module api's to connect an application with psql database.
* method 1: The entire environment resides on a single server. For a typical web application, that would include the web server, application server, and database server.
* method 2: The database management system (DBMS) can be separated from the rest of the environment to eliminate the resource contention between the application and the database, and to increase security.
#### When do you use the DISTINCT keyword in SQL?
* When we want to retrieve information in such a way that it does not contain repetitions.
#### Talk about the behavior/goal of these base SQL clauses: WHERE, GROUP BY, HAVING, ORDER BY?
* WHERE sets a set of rules that the resulting data must follow after the SELECT-FROM condition pair.
* GROUP BY groups the results based on one or more columns.
* HAVING checks wether datas have something in them. ex.: HAVING id > 12
* ORDER BY orders the results based on one or more columns of the table.
#### What are aggregate functions in SQL? Give 3 examples.
* SQL aggreagte functions operate on a set of values and returns a single value.
* AVG() - returns the average of a set.
* COUNT() - returns the number of items in a set.
* SUM() - returns the sum of all or distinct values in a set.
#### What kind of JOIN types do you know in SQL? Could you give examples?
* INNER JOIN: Returns records that have matching values in both tables
* LEFT JOIN: Returns all records from the left table, and the matched records from the right table
* RIGHT JOIN: Returns all records from the right table, and the matched records from the left table
* FULL JOIN: Returns all records when there is a match in either left or right table
#### What are the constraints in SQL?
* Constraints can be specified when the table is created with the CREATE TABLE statement, or after the table is created with the ALTER TABLE statement.
* Constraints are used to limit the type of data that can go into a table column.
* NOT NULL - Ensures that a column cannot have a NULL value
* UNIQUE - Ensures that all values in a column are different
* PRIMARY KEY - A combination of a NOT NULL and UNIQUE. Uniquely identifies each row in a table
* FOREIGN KEY - Prevents actions that would destroy links between tables
* CHECK - Ensures that the values in a column satisfies a specific condition
* DEFAULT - Sets a default value for a column if no value is specified
* CREATE INDEX - Used to create and retrieve data from the database very quickly
#### What is a cursor in SQL? Why would you use one?
* A cursor is a mechanism that enables traversal over the records in a database.
* Cursors facilitate subsequent processing in conjuction with the traversal.
* We use cursors to retrieve, add, or remove database records.
#### What are database indexes? When to use?
* A database index is a data structure that improves the speed of data retrieval operations on a database at the cost of additional writes and storage space to maintain the index data structure.
* An index normally includes a 'key' or direct link to the original row of data from which it was copied.
* We index databases when we want to improve the speed of data operations inside the database.
#### What are database transactions? When to use?
* A database transaction symbolizes a unit of work performed within a database management system against a database.
* To provide isolation between programs accessing a database concurrently.
* For recovery when an execution stops completely or partially and some or many operations remain incomplete.
#### What kind of database relations do you know? How to define them?
* One-to-One: A row in table A can have only one matching row in table B, and vice versa.
* One-to-many: This is the most common relationship type. In this type of relationship, a row in table A can have many matching rows in table B, but a row in table B can have only one matching row in table A.
(Each customer can only be assigned to one city. One city can be assigned to many customers.)*
#### You have a table with an “address” field which contains data like “3525, Miskolc, Régiposta 9.” (postcode, city, street name and address). How would you query all records related to Miskolc?
* SELECT * from address WHERE postcode = 3525
#### How would you keep track of what kind of data has changed after an UPDATE or DELETE operation in a table?
* I would add a log table to my database where I would insert the altered rows before alteration.
### HTML & CSS

#### What’s the difference between XML, XHTML and HTML?
* XML is used for data transfer between client and server.
* HTML is a form of plain text that is used by the browser to display websites.
* XHTML is a combination of both. XHTML requires that the document sent to the browser is well formated, unlike regular HTML.
#### How to include a JavaScript file in a webpage?
* Via the <script/> HTMK tag. 
* Javascript can either be written into the HTML in between the <script/> tags or a javascript file can be allocated with the src parameter.
* examples: <script> return 'asd' </script>, <script src="/asd/javascript.js"/>
#### How to include a CSS file in a webpage?
* Either by writing it into the HTML file between  <style/> tags or via linking the stylesheet at the beginning of the HTML file.
* examples: <style> .asd { border-color: black; } </style>, <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="/static/css/asd.css">
#### How to select an element using its id in CSS?
* By using a "#" before the id name.
* example: '#asd' refers to the HTML element with the "asd" id.
* ex: x = document.getElementById('asd')
* ex: x = document.querySelector('#asd')[0] <-- returns a list, hence the index at the end.
#### How to select elements using their class in CSS?
* By putting a "." before the class name.
* example: '.asd' refers to the HTML element with the "asd" class.
* ex: x = document.getElementsByClass('asd')[0] <-- returns a list, hence the index at the end.
* ex: x = document.querySelector('.asd')[0] <-- returns a list, hence the index at the end.
#### How to select elements which have the ‘alpha’ and ‘beta’ classes in CSS?
* By putting the alpha and beta classes next to each other, separated by a dot.
* example: ".alpha.beta {color: red;}" will color every HTML element that has the "alpha" alpha class and the "beta" beta class to be red.
#### How to select all list items in all ordered lists on the page in CSS?
* By refering to the HTML elements by tag name.
* example: "ol li {color: red;}" will color all elements in the ordered list to be red.
#### How to select elements using their attributes in CSS?
* By putting the attribute in square brackets after the target's tag name.
* example: "a[target] {color: red;}" will color all HTML elements red if they have the "target" attribute.
#### What are UX and UI?
* UI stands for User Interface. UI concerns the appearance an the interactable elemnts of the application.
* UX stands for User Experience. UX concerns the overall user experience including usability, functionality, design, and engineering of the application.
#### Please list some points that an application should fulfill to have good UX.
* It has to be efficient to use and has to use (world) language that the user is familiar with.
* Has to have at least some documentation about common errors and how to fix them.
* Reduce the users reliance on his/her/their memory by not hiding important functions behind multiple menus.
* Users should be informed of what the app/system/product is doing on their device.
#### What is XML, XSLT, DTD?
* XML, XSLT and DTD are all markup languages.
* XML is a way of transfering information to a browser.
* XSLT is uset to display XML data in a browser in a fancier manner.
* DTD (Document Type Definition) describes a tree structure of a document and something about it's data.
#### What is the difference between HTML and XML?
* HTML (Hyper Text Markup Language) is used for creating static webpage templates that are later translated in the browser as basic webpages.
* XML (eXtensible Markup Language) is also used to create webpages, however, XML is used for transporting data, rather then displaying it.
### Javascript

#### What is javascript?
* JavaScript is a high-level, object oriented programming language.
* Javascript is used to control the program behavior of webpages.
* Javascript is often compiled on-the-run when a client loads a webpage.
#### When to use AJAX? Bring examples of its usage.
* We use AJAX when we want to send or receive data from the server to the client without reloading the page.
#### What is DOM and how to manipulate it from Javascript?
* DOM stands for Document Oject Model for HTML and XML.
* DOM represents the document structure, and style, content.
* Javascript uses DOM objects to manipulate a page, to add/remove/or modify elements to/of a page.
* Individual elements can be made variable of in Javascript by using "document.getElementById('id')" or similar built in functions.
* New DOM elements can be created via "document.createElement('')" function, which then can be added by using "element.appendChild(newStuff)".
#### What are events and how/why to use them in Javascript?
* Events are acting as triggers for certain functions in a javascript code.
* Events can also be used as targets to target DOM elements in a Javascript function via "event.target"
* examples for events: "click", "dragover", "dragstart", "dragend"
#### What is event bubbling/capturing? How would you use it?
* Event bubbling happens when an inner scope function is called while an outer scope DOM element also has an event listener tied to it on the same event trigger.
* Event bubbling means that all functions will activate one by one starting from the innermost scope.
* Capturing is done to prevent the events from triggering all at once.
* example: event.cancelBubble = true; or event.stopPropagation();
#### What is JSON and how do we use it?
* JSON stands for JavaScript Object Notation.
* JSON is an open standard  file format and data interchange format.
* JSON files and data consist of key-value pairs but are not to be mistaken with DICT objects.
* JSON data can be used to communicate with the server using JavaScript.
* JSON data can be used to deliver data to and from the server without the need of reloading a webpage.
* JSON files can be used to store settings in applications.
## Software engineering

### Version control

#### What type of branching strategy would you use?
* I would make a different branch for every task that are not closely related and name the branches according to the company guidelines.
#### What would you do if you find a bug on the production code (master branch)?
* Roll back the merge and continue to work on the feature branch.
* Start a new branch for fixing the bug.
#### How can you move changes from one branch to another in GIT?
* By creating pull requests and merging the two branches that I want.
#### How does a VCS help with code reviews?
* VCS provides standard requirements that all projects must follow.
#### What is your favorite git command? Why?
* Commit, because when I'm using it, it means that I've progressed with my tasks.
#### What does remote/local mean in Git? 
* Local means files and changes that are only on your computer and are not shared.
* Remote are the files and changes that are shared between every collaborator in the project.

### DevOps

#### Why is it good to use a package manager software?
* Installing softwares is made way easier by their existence.
* With package managers, you are able to roll back to previous versions of programs with ease.
#### Why is it good to use a virtual environment for a project?
* Runtime enviroment updates can break programs when done due to differing syntaxes.
* With virtual enviroments you can make sure that the projects enviroment stays the same as in the beginning, even if you upgrade your main runtime enviroment.

### Networks

#### What kind of HTTP status codes do you know?
* 200 - OK (Everything went fine)
* 403 - Forbidden (The user does not have the necessary permissions)
* 404 - Not Found (The page source was not found on the requested)
* 405 - Method Not Allowed (The method with which the request was sent was not allowed on the requested url)
* 408 - Request Timeout (The server timed out waiting for the request. The client was not able to produce a request in the expected time period.)
#### What is an API?
* API stands for Application Programming Interface.
* An API defines interactions between multiple software applications or mixed hardware-software intermediates.
#### What is REST API?
* A REST API is an application program interface (API) that uses HTTP requests to GET, PUT, POST and DELETE data.
#### What is JSON? When to use?
* JSON stands for JavaScript Object Notation.
* JSON is an open standard file format and data interchange format.
* JSON files and data consist of key-value pairs but are not to be mistaken with DICT objects.
* We use JSON when we want to deliver information from front-end to the server and back or when we want to store user settings.
#### What is TCP/IP? What layers does it define, what are they responsible for?
* TCP stands for transmission Control Protocol.
* IP stands for Internet Protocol.
* They are a set of rules governing communications among all computers on the internet.
#### What’s the difference between TCP and UDP?
* TCP connections pre-check packets for possible errors.
* UDP connections do not check for errors.
* For this reason, UDP connections have lower latency, than TCP connections.
#### How does an HTTP Request look like? What are the most relevant HTTP header fields?
* A simple request message from a client computer consists of the following components:
	-A request line to get a required resource, for example a request GET /content/page1.html is requesting a resource called 		/content/page1.html from the server.
	-Headers (Example – Accept-Language: EN).
	-An empty line.
	-A message body which is optional.
	-All the lines should end with a carriage return and line feed. The empty line should only contains carriage return and line feed 		without any spaces.
#### How does an HTTP Response look like? What are the most relevant HTTP header fields?
* A simple response from the server contains the following components:
	-HTTP Status Code (For example HTTP/1.1 301 Moved Permanently, means the requested resource was permanently moved and redirecting 		to some other resource).
	-Headers (Example – Content-Type: html)
	-An empty line.
	-A message body which is optional.
#### What is DNS? How does it work?
* DNS stands for Domain Name Service.
* DNS services act like phonebooks for the internet.
* When you search for 'youtube.com' in your browser, your request gets sent through a DNS server, that DNS server then translates your url and sends you to the corresponding IP address.
#### What is a web server?
* A web server is a computer and software combination that is connected to the internet and accepts HTTP requests to distribute web pages.
#### Explain the client-server architecture.
* The client sends a request to the server.
* The server translates the request and gets the requested information from it's data storage (usually database).
* The server then sends a HTML template to the users browser with the requested data.
* The client's browser then compiles the HTML template and displays the webpage for the user.
#### What would you use a session for?
* To monitor and manage clients' permissions on the server.
* To cherrypick data that is specific to that exact user.
#### What would you use a cookie for?
* To store information about a client such as: login credentials, permissions, and on-site search history.
## Software Development Methodologies

#### What kind of software development methodologies do you know? What are the main features of these?
* Waterfall methodology - It’s a rigid linear model that consists of sequential phases (requirements, design, implementation, verification, maintenance) in which distinct goals are accomplished.
  	- Each phase must be 100% complete before the next phase can start, and traditionally there is no process for going back to 		  modify the project or direction.
* Adaptive approach which is able to respond to the changing requirements of the clients. Direct communication and feedback from customer.
* Agile development methodology:
 	-Requirement/Features/User stories/Product Backlog
 	-Scrum Team(with lead)
 	-Sprint Planning(relative time)
 	-Sprints 1-4 Weeks Duration
 	-Production deployment
 	-Done Checklist
   	(While this process other people making the design, build it, inegrate, test the software)
 	-Sprint Retrospective
 	-Product review(customer input)
 	-Potential Product Increment
#### What are the SCRUM roles?
* The Product Owner: Setting directions for the project.
* The SCRUM Master: Managing the development process.
* The Development Team: Those who develop the project.
#### What are the SCRUM ceremonies?
* Sprint Planning: Making sure the team knows what to do during the sprint.
* Daily SCRUM: The team sets a daily goal to achieve.
* Sprint Review: The work done during the sprint is showcased to the stakeholders.
* Sprint Retrospective: The team looks back at what have been done during the sprint and reflects on the aspects that can be improved on.
#### What are the SCRUM artifacts?
* Product Backlog: 
	A single, ordered list. 
	It provides transparency to the stakeholders of the product.
	Promotes a shared understanding of the work.
* Sprint Backlog: 
	Collaboratively created by the development team.
	Is regularly updated during the sprint.
	Provides a real-time picture of all of the work of the current sprint.
* Product Increment:
	Provides transparency to the progress done to the product.
	It is usable by stakeholders to inspect the current state of the product.
#### What is the main goal of a retrospective meeting?
* To reflect on what went well and what went wrong during the week
* To recognize potentially harmful behavioural problems in the group.
#### Explain, when would you recommend to use the waterfall methodology?
* Use Waterfall when:
  -The project is simple,
  -The project is complicated, but you have the expertise to deliver it,
  -It is all you know and you have no support for change,
  -The upfront investment is not risky to make,
  -You focus your performance measures on delivery date and budget.
